ha the
the norm
are
last time
we began the discussion I'll discrete-time processing
love continuous-time signals and
as a reminder let me review
the basic notion the idea was
dead we convert
from a continuous-time signal to a sequence
through an operation which I
represent as a continuous to discrete-time converter
and then that sequence
is used as the input to
inappropriate discrete-time system
and after appropriate discrete-time processing
that sequence is converted
back to a continuous-time signal
through an operation which i-label as
a discrete to continuous-time converter
now in the lecture
last time we carried out some analysis
which related 4s the spectra
in the first step this operation namely
in the transformation from a continuous-time
signal to sequence and
let me by the way draw your attention to the fact
that in the real world this operation
is essentially implemented
by what you would typically label as an analog to digital converter
if in fact the discrete-time processing
is being done digitally now it's important to emphasize that it's not
exactly what an analog to digital converter
does but in some sense at least you should think
love this mapping from continuous time to discrete-time
in very much the same way there one would think an analog to digital
converter
and the mapping back and is corresponds
in some sense to a what would happen
with a digital to analog converter well
let me review what is involved in the mapping from
the continuous-time signal to the sequence and
let me stress again that this operation
is basically in the continues to discrete-time conversion
a two-step process in
the first part of the process the continuous-time signal
is modulated with an impulse train
where the period of the imposed strain is capital T
and so we have a continuous-time
impose Train Signal which captures
the samples love the original continuous-time signals
that in Paul strain
is then put through an operation
which essentially re labels
the samples so that the
sample values the impulse areas
are relabeled as sequence values
and the result of that conversion is then
the sequence X event so the overall process then
is a sampling process followed by
what is simply in this box relabeling
process and although as I
indicated just a minute ago that is essentially what an analog to digital
converter does
now like to digital converter doesn't necessarily carry it out
in those two steps but particularly
in terms love carrying through an analysis
thinking of it as a two-step process is particularly convenient
now we talked last time
about what this mapping from continuous time to discrete-time
means both in the time domain in terms of the spectra
and in particular in the time domain we
begin with the continuous-time signal
which is then samples with an impulse train
and converted to a sequence by
simply generating a sequence whose values
are the area is love the impulses
and I stress the fact that what this corresponds to
essentially is and normalization of the time axis
essentially by dividing the time axis by capital T
in the frequency-domain then
we had the spectrum of the original signal
which because that the sampling process is
replicated at multiples integer multiples
all the sampling frequency Omega so badass
or to pile over capital T
and then in converting the impulses
to a sequence we are essentially
normalizing the frequency axis so that
the frequency to pile over capital T gets relabeled is to pie
and the resulting discrete-time spectrum looks like
I indicate here which really is
nothing more and a frequency scaling
corresponding to the Associated time scaling so the mapping
from the imposed strain spectrum to the discrete-time spectrum
corresponds to mapping specified
by capital Omega equal to small make a times capital T
an equivalent Lee it's the frequency
to pile over capital T which is
of course the sampling frequency which gets normalized
to the frequency to pie
and so in the frequency domain
their is a frequency normalization Associated
with the fact dead corresponding to this spectrum
is a time sequence or discrete time sequence
as I show previously and a discrete-time sequence
is related to the
original continuous-time signal
through a time normalization in other words
these sequence values are simply samples at the continuous-time signal
with the time axis we normalized
now what we want to consider this is the conversion from continuous time to
discrete-time
what we want to consider now is the overall system
which implements not just the conversion but filtering
and then coming back onto the conversion back to continuous-time
so let's look at the overall system
and the overall system courses I've
stressed several times in the past consists
love first the sampling process
conversion to an impulse train
and the imposed strain converted to a sequence
that sequence is then processed
through are discrete-time filter
and after the discrete-time processing
the result of that is converted back
to an impulse train so this resulting process sequence
is then converted back to an impulse train
and then finally we carry out the the sampling
process by simply using a low-pass filter
Associated with the with the cutoff associated with the sampling frequency
that we use
now typically in a system like that which implements
discrete-time processing continuous-time signals
we either we need to ensure in one way or another
that the band with love the input is
sufficiently limited so that we avoid aliasing
one way to do that is to force it in one way or another or
simply know that our signal satisfies the band with constrain
although a fairly typical thing to do in addition
to this sampling process is
to include what is referred to as
and anti aliasing filter in other words this is a filter
that would ban limit the input
and at least half the sampling frequency
so that we r guaranteed and
that their is no aliasing it's carried out
in this process and it's important
to stress dead in this kinda processing discrete-time processing
continuous-time signals except in certain
special situations its very important
to avoid aliasing because we're going to want
to do a reconstruction after we do the sampling and processing
okay now this is the sequence of steps in the time domain
let's examine what happens as a consequence is this
in the frequency domain well
let's choose some typeof simple representative spectrum
and of course what's important about it is that
the specter that we choose is banned limited or that there's an anti-aliasing
filter
and it's not the shape of course that is critical
and as we work our way through the system
this is the continuous-time spectrum
after sampling that spectrum is replicated at
multiples of the sampling frequency integer multiples the sampling frequency
and so
there would be another one over here and another one over here at cetera
and then in converting to a discrete-time sequence
their is The Associated
frequency normalization so that the sampling frequency
yes normalized to a frequency
to pie okay now at that point
where we are in the system
is at this point
so that we've converted to a sequence we now
want to carry out some filtering and then after that filtering
convert back to a continuous-time signals
alright so here we are at the
spectrum Associated with the
sequence and now
the processing they were carrying out is
linear time-invariant filtering in the discrete time domain
and what that corresponds to then is multiplying
this spectrum by the filter frequency response and I've chosen
a particular shape and again it's not the shape that's important to the
discussion
but the fact for example that it has a particular cutoff frequency which will
kinda track
as we work through this and so now
the spectrum of why I have an the output
the digital filter is the product this spectrum
and the 4e a transformer frequency response
I'll the digital filter
now in working our way through we're going to take the output at the filter
and undo the two-step process so we now want to take that sequence
converted to an impulse train and then take then imposed strain
Andy sample through a low-pass filter
so here we are now at the output to the digital filter
we then convert that to an impulse train well that's really on doing the original
time normalization
and so what that means is that we
are on doing the frequency normalization in particular
we're dividing the frequency axis by
capital T whereas this point
in y Omega was to pie
now it's to pile over capital T
what that means is that acquittal and Lee were multiplying this spectrum
by the frequency response the digital filter
but now linearly scaled in frequency
so that will what was a cutoff frequency Omega subsea
is now a cutoff frequency up Omega subsea
divided by capital T so
now the next step in the process is the reconstructing
low-pass filter and what that extracts is simply the portion
I'll this periodic spectrum around the origin
and so finally and spectrum of the output
up the overall system will be the spectrum
of the input multiplied
by a frequency response
which is the digital filter frequency response
frequency scaled by dividing
that digital filter frequency axis by capital T
okay now what we can ask is
we've got this processing we've converted to discrete-time we've gone
back to continuous-time
and one can ask now what acquittal and
overall continuous-time systems is that correspond to
in other words if we that of course is a continuous-time system it's a continuous
time you put a continuous-time output
and the overall system dan
would be one that would give us exactly the same output spectrum
as we're getting well what is that well we have
is an output spectrum which is the product
all the input spectrum and digital filter frequency characteristic
frequency scale and so in fact
the resulting digital filter I'm sorry continuous-time
filter is simply the digital filter
with inappropriate frequency scaling
in other words with the frequency axis divided by capital T
so sent another way if
we show here
the frequency response or the
original digital filter
then the corresponding continuous-time
filter would be this
frequency scaled and then because love
The Associated low-pass filtering in the reconstruction
we would select out just one of these periods in particular the portion around
the origin
and the essential consequences that is that the corresponding
continuous-time filter then is
given by this and these two are related
simply by a linear scaling the frequency axis
and note dead where the digital filter has a cutoff frequency
Omega subsea the continuous-time filter
has a cutoff frequency Omega subsea divided by capital T
so that's the linear frequency scaling and
by the way plant away for now and will return to this point later
plant the way for now the the observation
dad even if the digital filter frequency response
is fixed which we would assume it is
by changing the sampling frequency in fact
what we're able to do is a fact a linear scaling
or the acquittal in continuous-time
okay well this is pretty much the process in the analysis
but to highlight a number the issues and emphasize these points
why I like to do is illustrate
somewhat this with a videotape demonstration
that in fact was made originally as part of another course a course
devoted entirely to
digital signal processing which essentially is discrete-time processing
whether or not it's related to continuous-time signals
and what I'd like to now focus on
are summer the details of that demonstration
in the demonstration the
specific impulse response there
is used for the digital filter
or discrete-time filter is the one that I show here
and the Associated
frequency response is the frequency response
love a discrete-time low-pass filter as i indicate below
and the cutoff frequency that filter as i indicate the filter was designed as a
discreet I felt with the cutoff frequency hi over five
and let me just draw your attention to the fact that
pie over five is also
10 love to pie
and so in fact the digital
for discrete-time filter cutoff frequency is a tenth
to pie and as all stress again shortly
remember that in the frequency normalization
or a normalization to pie represents
in effect the sampling frequency and so
the consequence of that is that cutoff frequency really is going to be
associated
with the 10th all the sampling frequency but for now keep in mind that is just
simply attentive to
on now the
equivalent continuous-time
system interns are the impulse response
is of course a ban limited interpolation
love the up the
impose response associated with the discrete-time
filter and in the frequency domain the frequency response
is correspondingly a timescale
and a timescale I'm sorry a frequency scale
version at the frequency response so in fact
in the frequency domain and in the time domain
related to the continuous-time signal
the Associated impulse response is
what I indicate here a ban limited interpolation
or the discrete-time impulse response
and time scale than
and the frequency response following the discussion that we've previously gone
through
is a frequency scale version all the one associated with the digital filter
well the first thing that all want to look at is
the impulse response and when we do
let me just indicate that
in the actual implementation things are slightly different
then they are associated with the ideal analysis
in particular in converting
from a discrete-time sequence
to the continuous-time signal whereas
this way of looking at it is convenient
in the context that the analysis in fact the way it's done
is is using more or less
standard digital to analog converter
one what a digital to analog converter does as i indicated in the previous
lecture
is to convert the sequence
not to an impulse train but in fact to go directly through
zero-order hold and so usually what comes onto
a digital to analog converter is a staircase
tightness signal associated with the zero-order hold
and then the result of that is low-pass filter to do the reconstruction
so what we want to look at and is
that reconstruction first with just an impulse input
and so what we'll see after the low-pass filter
for the impulse response is
a smooth curve like this but also as part of the demonstration
what all do just to show the zero-order hold
is to take the low-pass filter out temporarily
and then put it back in so first let's just look at
the filter impulse response
what we see here is the impost response
all the overall system and
we observe for one thing that it's a symmetrical impulse response in other
words corresponds to a linear phase filter
we can also look at the impulse response before that the same playing
low-pass filter let's take out that the sampling low-pass filter
slowly and wide
we observe is basically the output I'll
the digital to analog converter which of course is a staircase a boxcar function
not an impulse train in the real world the
output over the day converted generally is a boxcar type function
we can put the the sampling filter back in now
and notice that the effectivity sampling filter is basically
to smooth out the rough edges in
the boxcar output from the DA converter
okay so that's the impulse response the system
now what I like to show is the frequency
response the system and to measure the frequency response of course what we can
do
is put a sine wave
into the system and looked at
the sinusoidal output so in particular now what will happen is that
with the system we will put in
a continuous-time sinusoid which is sampled
converted to a sequence
the sample continues sigh sinus so it is a discrete-time sinusoid
that goes through the digital filter and gets attenuated or
amplified appropriately and then
the output if that is converted back and that's
again a sinusoidal output that gets converted back
to a continuous-time sinusoid
theoretically as i indicate here but again as we just saw
really represented by zero-order hold followed by
a low-pass filter so thats
the overall operation with one
modification from the diagram that we have here
in this particular diagram I've included
a and anti-aliasing filter
in fact in the demonstration there is no
anti-aliasing filter and so
in fact the input is a sinusoidal input
which is not band limited
by virtue of an anti-aliasing filter it's only
course been limited appropriately
if we choose the sinusoidal frequency that way
so there is no anti-aliasing filter and this is the system
and one consequence if that
is dead in fact if we sweep
the input sinusoid only up to half the sampling frequency
will see no aliasing but if we let its we passed that we're going to get
aliasing
now in the demonstration the sampling rate
its picked for this party the demonstration is a 20 kilohertz sampling
rate
that means based on the sampling theorem that as long as the input frequency
is below 10 killer hurts we get no aliasing
when the input frequency goes beyond 10 killer hurts
that higher frequency is going to get alias down
into a lower frequency a consequence is that then
is that as we go through the process saying
and we demonstrate the frequency response to the system
what we'll see in the output is
no alias saying when the input is below 10 killer hurts
as the input sweeps past 10 killer hurts
when when we let it which we will eventually in the demonstration
dan in fact that frequency as it finally shows up here
will begin to be aliased down into a lower frequency
another way thinking about that is dead
when we watch the frequency response
love the system as
we look at the digital filter frequency response
what we're sweeping and as we go from zero
up to 10 killer hurts
in the input frequency is this portion of the frequency response
as we sweep from 10 killer hurts out to 20 kilohertz
what we'll see is this portion the frequency response
in other words will see it periodically replicate
or if we look at the
corresponding continuous-time frequency response
what it means really is that sweeping
from 0 to 10 killer hurts
is moving up this way and then sweeping from 10 killer hurts
to 20 kilohertz on the input
really because if the alias saying
reflects itself in a digital filter by
looking back down it toward lower frequencies and so the continuous-time
filter
sweeps back down from 10 killer hurts
back 20 okay
so that so we'll see and we'll see it in several different ways as explained in
the demonstration
so now let's look and the frequency response
sold now we like to illustrate
is the frequency response love the acquittal in continuous-time
filter and we can do that by sweeping the filter with a sinusoidal input
so what we'll see in this demonstration is
on the upper trace the input sinusoid on the lower trace the output sinusoid
using a 20 kilohertz sampling rate in a sweep
from 0 to 10 killer hurts in other words a sweep from 0 to
effectively hi interns at the digital filter
so work will observe as the input frequency increases
is that the output sinusoid will have essentially constant amplitude
up to the cutoff frequency the filter and then approximately zero amplitude
past so let's now sweet the filter
frequency response
and the area is the filter
cutoff frequency
now we can also observe the filter frequency response in
several other ways one way in which we can observe it is by
looking also at the amplitude if the output sinusoid as
a function of frequency rather than as a function of time
and so will observe that on the left-hand SCO
while on the right-hand scope will have the same trace their we just saw
namely to traces the upper traces the input sinusoid
the lower traces the output sinusoid and in addition to observing
the frequency response let's also listen to the output sinusoid
and observe the attenuation
in the output as we go from the field to pass band to the filter stopping again a
20 kilohertz sampling rate
and a sweep range from 0 to 10 killer now
course when the filter stop
now if we increase the sweep range
from 10 killer hurts the 20 kilohertz
so that the sweep range is equal to the sampling frequency
in essence that corresponds the sweeping at the digital filter
from 0 to 2pi and in that case we'll begin to see
some %uh the periodicity in the digital filter frequency response
so let's do that now with 20 kilohertz sampling rate
and a sweep range is 0 to 20 kilohertz
now as we come near to Pine
we get back into the past
an finally back to
a0 to 10 killer hurts we so they were again sweeping
only from 0 to 2pi with regard to the digital filter
now an important observation is that
with the digital or discrete-time
filter cutoff frequency fixed as i've indicated here
and I remind you that what the cutoff frequency is
is a 10 to hi with that cutoff frequency fixed
because I love the normalization that we get
as we come back to a continuous-time
filter in fact what we have
is a cutoff frequency dead is
dependent on the sampling frequency or on the sampling period
and more specifically since the discrete-time or digital
filter has a cutoff frequency which is attentive to pie
the normalization as you recall
is dead to pie in discrete-time frequency
corresponds to Omega sed s/ the sampling frequency
in terms of continuous-time frequency the consequence
is dead this cutoff frequency in fact
is 110 all
not to pine now because at the normalization its 110
I'll the sampling frequency so
consequently as we change the sampling frequency
what will happen is that even with the discrete-time filter cutoff fixed
the cutoff frequency I'll the equivalent continuous-time
filter will change now
that's what I want to demonstrate but let me
again stress and ask you to keep in mind dead
this demonstration is done without an anti-aliasing filter in
and we are going to be changing the sampling frequency
and so keep in mind dead as
we look at this as the input frequency
sweeps past half the sampling frequency whatever sampling frequency we happen to
be looking at
then because the fact that there's no anti-aliasing filter
will get daily as saying in other words the frequency in the digital filter
discrete-time filter as we sweep the input frequency up
will move up in frequency until we get
past half the sampling frequency and then essentially will move back down
frequency consequently what will get
then are or we'll see our periodic replications
the frequency response when we swept past have see half the sampling alright
so now
let's look at the same digital filter
but the frequency response as
we change the sampling frequency now
what we would like to demonstrate is the effective changing the same thing
frequency and we know that
the sampling that the effective filter cutoff frequency
is tied to the sampling frequency
and for this particular filter corresponds to attend
of the sampling frequency consequently if we double the sampling frequency we
should double
the affective filter past and where war
double the filter cutoff frequency and
so let's do that now it again is 0-10 killer hurt sweep range
but a forty kilohertz sampling frequency
me and
we should observe that the filter cutoff frequency has now doubled
out 24 killer now
let's begin to decrease the filter sampling frequency
so from forty let's change the sampling frequency to 20 kilohertz
we should see the cutoff frequency cut in half me
now we can go even further we can cut the sampling frequency down
10 killer hurts and remember that the sweep range is 0 to 10 killer hurt so
now will be sweeping from 0 to 2pi
so as we get close to two pi will see the passband again
and now
let's cut down the sampling frequency even further
to by kilohertz my
here we are at 2pi
and then
at for pop alright so
that illustrates the effective changing the sampling frequency
now let's conclude this demonstration at the effect
on the sampling frequency on the filter cutoff frequency by carrying out some
filtering
on some live audio white will
watching this case is the output
audio waveform as a function of time
on the single trace go and also
will listen to the output will begin it with a forty killer hurts
sampling rate then reduce that to 20 kilohertz 10 killer hurts and then five
alerts
and in each of those cases the effective filter cutoff frequency
then is cut in half from for keywords to kill hurts
21 kilohertz and then to 500 cycles so let's begin with the forty killer hurt
sampling frequency
or ineffective filter cutoff frequency of work killer
now let's reduce net 20 kilohertz am
frequency or to kill hurts filter
and 10 kelleher sampling frequency
the
then finally in my Google Earth family
cigars running to me why minor in Psych grueling
analog all the
I now let's finally include why returning to
a little higher quality ragtime like me the same
theme
right well hopefully
what you've seen in the demonstration and in this lecture
is gives you a sense of feeling
for the analysis and the use
I'll discrete-time filters
for processing continuous-time signals and
as you may be aware and as I've tried to indicate
previously in the past this in fact is
one very important but not the only but one very important
context in which discrete-time filtering
issues and this in fact is
an area that is developing rapidly because at the fact dead
microprocessors digital technology computers et cetera
afford considerable flexibility
in carrying out digital processing of signals
and it is and went digital processing is used at
naturally corresponds
to to implementing the processing
and analyzing it in discrete-time now
in the next lecture will be continuing
on another aspect developing another aspect
love sampling any particular
what we'll be talking about is sampling of discrete-time signals
as all indicate there one of the contexts in which
discrete-time sampling in fact plays an important role
is in the context in which
we are processing continuous-time signals
using discrete time processing where in fact
one step that we might want to take in addition to the steps that we've talked
about here
is an additional sampling process following
whatever kinds of filtering that we that we do well that's a discussion and a
topic that will be going into in the next lecture
thank you